---
title: 'Blog Post number 1'
date: 2012-08-14
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---

This is a sample blog post. Lorem ipsum I can't remember the rest of lorem ipsum and don't have an internet connection right now. Testing testing testing this blog post. Blog posts are cool.

Much ado about nothing
======

An interesting fundamental question in metaphysics is - “Why is there something instead of nothing?” When I sit to ponder about this I have a thousand other questions. What does nothing even mean? Absence of absolutely anything we consider as something is nothing ? Right? I feel, to have a go at this question, one needs to first understand what does it mean when one says something exists.

What does it mean when we say something exists? My first thought is that something exists for an observer basis of the properties that the observer can identify it with. Can anything exist for us without it having some properties that we use to identify it with? For example, let’s take this thing that I have drawn. It exists for me. I identify it as something “black”, “circular” with some “radius”. I call it a “dot”. This “dot” exists with these properties. I take each property out one by one and I take the “dot” out with it. It ceases to exist without these properties observed by an observer.

                                                                      *
 
Does this mean that the existence of this object is contingent on its properties and an observer of these properties. Let’s take it one at a time. Let’s focus on the property first. This is black and circular for me. Now, imagine, a snake looking at the screen. I wonder if it sees anything. A snake sees in infrared. Whatever it sees, certainly it won’t see it as a black and circular object. Properties are subjective to the observer. While an object is by definition objective. An object should be ontologically more fundamental than its properties. I mean to to say it’s properties exist because the object exists and not the other way round.

The existence of the object can’t be contingent on the observer as well. I see a black and circular object with certain dimensions. But what about somebody visually impaired? They are not privy to these properties or the object. Does the dot not exist just because they don’t identify these visually observable properties . They can’t observe it through any other means. It is not available to be perceived through any other sense. It is a “dot” on a computer screen. The “dot” does not stop existing? That’s unfalsifiable. I have created the dot. It does exist. I can’t deny that.

Like a visually impaired person will have never observed the dot, there might be objects with properties which will never be available to us for observation in any form. Dark matter came very close. However, recently we observed its gravitational effect i.e. curvature in space time caused by its mass. It’s called dark matter because we don’t perceive it like the rest of the matter. However, It’s gravitational effects are observed. Had we not been able to observe its effects, it would have still existed. But, suppose, there were no observers in the universe, would the universe not exist ? Idealists would be certain that it would not. I have strong reasons to believe it would. After all, we are very close to filling the scientific gaps that explain the birth of life on earth post the following billions of years after the big bang, the birth of our universe.

Moreover, if something’s existence is contingent on an observer, then what about the observer? An observer is something. It’s own existence will be contingent on something which in turn would again need an explanation. There will be an infinite regress problem here. Why is this problem problem of infinite regress introduced in my argument ? It is because I have already assumed that the observer is something i.e. it is ontologically more fundamental than an observer.

Is that a wrong assumption? Descartes would say it is and probably quote his famous words “ I think, therefore I am”. He would hold observation, awareness as more primitive to his own existence. But hold on! even observation is something. Everything is something. Physicalist, idealist, dualist or panpsychist, whatever your ontological primitive, mind or matter, it is still something. In Descartes’s story the question is - “why is there observation or awareness rather than nothing?” In a materialist’s story the question is - “why is there physical stuff rather than nothing?”

After this thought experiment, I am inclined to conclude that the existence of something is the ontological primitive. There is something and hence the possibility of its subjective properties. There is nothing more fundamental than something and there is no way to break it down further. When I say something exists, it is equivalent to saying there is existence. Why is there ‘something’ rather than ‘nothing’. A question for another day. :)

